.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" libspectrum.3: libspectrum summary
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2026 Philip Kendall
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.\" Author contact information:
.\"
.\" E-mail: philip-fuse@shadowmagic.org.uk
.\"
.\"
.TH libspectrum 3 "9th March, 2026" "Version 1.6.0" "Emulators"
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH NAME
libspectrum \(em Sinclair ZX Spectrum support library
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <libspectrum.h>
.PP
.BI "libspectrum_error libspectrum_init( void );"
.br
.BI "void libspectrum_end( void );"
.br
.BI "libspectrum_error libspectrum_identify_file( libspectrum_id_t *type, const char *filename, const unsigned char *buffer, size_t length );"
.br
.BI "libspectrum_error libspectrum_snap_read( libspectrum_snap *snap, const libspectrum_byte *buffer, size_t length, libspectrum_id_t type, const char *filename );"
.br
.BI "libspectrum_error libspectrum_tape_read( libspectrum_tape *tape, const libspectrum_byte *buffer, size_t length, libspectrum_id_t type, const char *filename );"
.br
.BI "libspectrum_error libspectrum_rzx_read( libspectrum_rzx *rzx, const libspectrum_byte *buffer, size_t length );"
.PP
Additional public helper APIs are documented in
.RI ` libspectrum.txt ',
including the zlib helpers
.BR libspectrum_zlib_inflate ()
and
.BR libspectrum_zlib_compress (),
the allocation helper macros
.BR libspectrum_new ,
.BR libspectrum_new0
and
.BR libspectrum_renew ,
the growable buffer API
.BR libspectrum_buffer_alloc ()
through
.BR libspectrum_buffer_append (),
RZX signature inspection helpers such as
.BR libspectrum_rzx_get_keyid ()
and
.BR libspectrum_rzx_get_signature (),
and state/query helpers such as
.BR libspectrum_tape_state ()
and
.BR libspectrum_ide_dirty ().
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I libspectrum
is a library for reading and writing some of the file formats used by
emulators of the Sinclair ZX Spectrum. It also contains routines
providing information about the various Spectrum clones which were
available.
.PP
The file formats currently supported by
.I libspectrum
are:
.IP \(bu 2
Snapshots: .z80, .szx, .sna (all read/write), .zxs, .sp., .snp and +D
snapshots (read only).
.IP \(bu 2
Tape images: .tzx, .tap, .spc, .sta, .ltp (read/write) and .pzx, Warajevo .tap,
Z80Em and CSW version 1 (read only).
.IP \(bu 2
Input recordings: .rzx (read/write).
.IP \(bu 2
Disk images: .dsk (both plain and extended), .d40, .d80, .fdi, .img, .mgt,
\[char46]opd, .sad, .scl, .td0, .trd and .udi (identification only).
.IP \(bu 2
Timex cartridges: .dck (read only).
.IP \(bu 2
IDE hard disk images: .hdf (read/write).
.IP \(bu 2
Microdrive cartridge images: .mdr (read/write).
.PP
Additionally, any files compressed with
.IR bzip2 "(3),"
.IR gzip "(3)"
or
.IR zip "(3)"
can be read and will be transparently decompressed.
.PP
Full documentation for
.I libspectrum
is provided in
.RI ` libspectrum.txt '.
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR bzip2 "(3),"
.IR fuse "(1),"
.IR fuse\-utils "(1),"
.IR gzip "(3),"
.IR zip "(3)."
.PP
The comp.sys.sinclair Spectrum FAQ, at
.br
.IR "http://www.worldofspectrum.org/faq/index.html" .
.\"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Philip Kendall (philip\-fuse@shadowmagic.org.uk)
